um we are going to have a very special
performance uh from Huntress Huntress
yanos is an African afro-hungarian trans
Femme artist with a degree in
experimental animation from California
Institute of the Arts
Huntress is known for mediating her
inquiry into the layered nature of
identity through simulation augmentation
and virtual reality work through her
expanded practice across media punches
weaves a virtually augmented mythology
of the self she synthesizes sharp
renders with anarchic vaporwave
Aesthetics to explore the fantasies of a
black non-binary artist grappling with
lived realities of systemic violence and
exclusion
what you're about to see is a
performance called eclipseatrix exuvia
it's a virtual reality motion capture
performance that was uh that was
commissioned by the Athens biennale this
year it just debuted a couple weeks ago
this is only the second time it's been
performed
um and it was also produced uh with the
assistance of transfer gallery and San
Jose State University Cadre a shout out
to Kalani Nicole and Andrew Blanton for
their work in making this project
possible without and with that said uh
here is Huntress we'll be back
afterwards for a short discussion
foreign
[Music]
country
crazy
[Music]
foreign
back
[Music]
wards
whatever
[Music]
mountains
dismissed
[Music]
Skeptics are relics
and synthetic expressions
[Music]
exercise
foreign
[Music]
thank you
really close
[Music]
foreign
yeah
[Music]
development
Aesthetics of resistance
[Music]
remix history
synthetic expressions
[Music]
foreign
welcome back everybody I am live with
the one the only Huntress what's up girl
hi
it's so good to see you and it's so good
to see you looking so fabulous
um this filter is amazing and for folks
who don't know this filter is a version
of the virtual home that your avatar is
wearing in the performance
um and if the audience doesn't also know
there's also a physical sculptural
component that you actually wear IRL
3D printed
[Laughter]
um what a doe performance
um I was a little bit involved in some
of the production aspects a little bit
but
um you know it's so cool to see it kind
of finally come to fruition and I'm I'm
so excited to present it with the gray
area audience
um what just to kind of get start us off
like I'd love to you know learn more
about you know how you got started
technically how it works because I know
there's you know you wear a motion
capture suit
um and yeah how did how did the idea for
this performance kind of come to you
um well
I've always loved motion capture Vibes
so incredible because I like spend hella
time doing like like animation so it's
like so like a unlocked you know quick
move like like I'm like live unreal and
then just like
The Poetry stuff I've been doing and uh
Unity 3D modeling all things I love to
do
um this piece was for the Athens piano
like you said so I like themed it around
like this like
thing that I dislike I've y'all were
also talking about you know this like
different scenes and like different
historical eras and like I just really
have been super into like
like pre-history and like all these like
all these like unknown you know Past
Times and like so I just created like my
own like goddess version of like myself
and like this Eclipse theme which I
think really like
mirrored a lot of things I I talked
about in the poem which is like
all of these things about like
uh
like Celestial Shadow and like I think
about tech as like kind of like uh a
portal and so I I just like I've just
been like I've just been like oh it's
like living in that digital world so
this is that was like my you know just a
performance that I did there and that
was it yeah
oh I'm sorry that I was I got cut I got
disconnected there for a second yo you
know what it's all good [__] happens
um but we're back together now
um you know what I wanted to ask you you
know before we before we broke was that
um you know one something that we've
been trying to Grapple with throughout
the course of the festival are the
harmful impacts of technology and the
harmful impacts of certain protocols and
something that I've always really
admired about your work is one your you
know sparkling you know positivity
um and two kind of the the Fantastical
and the the forward-looking way that
your work presents itself I mean
um it's rather than kind of issuing the
technology and you know kind of railing
about it you really have a way of
repurposing it to fit your needs
um and making space for yourself I mean
in the performance we just saw you built
the whole environment that you appear in
every blade of grass was rendered by you
um and so I was wondering you know if
you could talk a little bit about that
and how you know as an artist you know
being you know using tools that exist in
a corporate context or an extractive
context I mean we've been talking a lot
about racist algorithms you know how do
you how do you how how are you able to
repurpose this for your own purposes and
kind of break out of some of the you
know almost hegemonic control of of the
tech companies
OMG I'm I I they they affect me like
hella like just today I mean I've made
this filter literally before this
literally right before this earlier
today this like a few hours ago
I got the notification I was like oh
yeah yeah and I was like I should I
should look cute right make the filter
and then I had to re-download snap lens
and I don't know I think we've talked
about this but Snapchat like like had me
make them some filters in the past and
then like never ended up paying me for
that job
and I was like months of work on
different filters that they had me doing
and like like behind the scenes videos
and they never paid me I never got a
sent and I was like
so I don't know but like they affect me
that stuff that stuff like when when did
you talk about like oh my gosh these
these companies that like those I have
that lived experience of like oh I I was
making filters and they wouldn't approve
them and they were like no you can't
have them online we will not we will not
let you have these filters unless you
you like explain yourself essentially
like
and like all these different like Hoops
that you have to jump through and then
like these things that actually affect
me like I don't know I lived it
firsthand so it's like I know there's
like lots of like negative things
and like
I definitely try my best to like to like
still just like
just have fun with it and also like like
you said like just exude you know the
joy that I have in like
like my heart really so it's like like
even in like you know I I'm I've you
know I've been through hella hardship I
can't even begin so it's like
it's just like oh my gosh like
these little things like like I don't
know I just that when I have to be like
okay now I have to I have to use snap
camera to do this thing like it's like
okay like the world that I live in is
just all that it's just all those kinds
of so it's like
Snapchat or not just Snapchat it's like
like is this is small small apples
compared to how I can't go out wearing
the clothes I can't I can't leave this
building wearing these clothes I'm
wearing because I'm I'm currently in
Hungary and not in Budapest even so so
I don't know like I can't I don't know
so it's just like yeah you know blinds
closed and I can wear I can wear what I
want to wear
and like I don't know it's Snapchatting
all those things I mean they are
enabling a free thing so it's free that
I downloaded which I love I don't I
definitely believe more should uh more
freeware obviously I love freeware
um but
yeah I mean I just want to get you know
my what my heart out into the world
because I want to share it with I
believe what I believe is to be other
beings of you know the same Universal
Consciousness Vibe you know that we're
all experiencing the moment and just I
want to be part of the moment and there
are all these people who are like oh the
moment is ours and I'm like no like the
moment is yes it's ours it's all of ours
but it's not like it doesn't belong to
like Facebook
the moment lol
yeah whoa
um I mean it's it's it's it's it's
heartbreaking to hear those stories but
also you know it's you know I it's we
hear them all the time in so many
different ways and uh it it's it's you
just feel the extraction but you know
despite all of that you know you're
still able to make these worlds where
you can live your most beautiful
fantasies
um and you know it's it's so you know we
were just talking with MacKenzie work
and finding and examining places of play
as potential Pathways to rethink the
world around us
um and you know one in a way that's
perhaps not so rooted in labor and
extraction
um and my own personal Utopia yeah
exactly exactly
um and it was you know I was in you know
your work is so playful it's beautiful
it's it's it's serious but also funny
um it's Fantastical but also relatable
and you know you really bring the
audience into your performances and so
and your Works in so many ways I mean
I'm thinking particular of your
particularly your filter work which is
so transformative body
um when you
when how do I say this
um how when you begin to start making
uh anything uh and you start slowly
putting the pieces together pieces of a
world together how do you approach this
idea how do you approach this idea of
making your own space and building your
own worlds like what does this concept
of World building mean to you
to me it means like
it is a it is a real it's a reality when
I think about like that little clip I'm
like okay that's a clip that exists it
not just like exists as a clip but like
exists as a memory which is like really
just like a weird concept to have as
like a memory but also like synapses and
also like a reality if I think about
like Multiverse I'm just like oh this
reality exists even spatially within our
reality somewhere I mean it already
exists spatially within the device
somehow like within the code of the
device like the zeros and ones and also
the pixels but like
it's also like I believe that I'm
tapping not just tapping in but like I'm
participating in the creation of another
realm that is like
that is and it makes it feel so real
when you do something like a 3D print or
if you do something like uh could I do
sometimes that's like architectural
models before where I then go and build
that thing that like a tiny house or
whatever like
it just feels like okay these are like
real things so it's just like
I'm I'm
I'm not just generating but like I'm uh
participating in you know this this
evolution of space in another dimension
in another this like other uh like plane
of existence and I'm you know living I'm
living in that I'm living in that zone
I'm living outside of this space
so I can express myself in a space that
doesn't have the restrictions that I
like oh I can if I want to have these
materials that I can't I don't have
literally I don't have you know I can't
afford the material or whatever like I
have I can make whatever material I want
in the digital you know even if it's not
a real material like real material but
like I'm so happy to be able to do this
3D print piece that was commissioned by
the Athens if you know that was so
unreal like to then see this this thing
in like
in like on my head in reality it was
like so trippy and just to like
it is really affirms that you know
reality of of these other spaces and of
course I love to do 3D scans which is
like taking an object from The Real
World and putting it in that space I've
been I've been loving doing the 3D scans
because then it's like okay I can just
take it out of this world to put it over
there like
and and
so
yeah I I think about you know I I when I
when I go about making something like
that it's like
usually like a Vibe of like oh I just
think about whatever the clip I want to
do whatever I want to do
I can essentially do it so I'm just like
oh I have to think of what I want to do
and then I just go do what I was I was
thinking about like a next one that I
want to do is like I've seen I've seen
people do this before but I was gonna do
like different like like a maybe a video
version of me and then like it's a
filter and then it's like my face opens
up and then there's like a smaller
version of me in there controlling my
brain and then like there's another one
doing a different thing inside of there
like you know like I'm kind of like a
like a multi-layer that was an idea that
I think I might animate next but you
know
just yeah just having fun like and just
whatever I want to do like I can do it
like but it's like I have to think of it
first
[Laughter]
um you know it's you know interesting
that you were talking about that like
you know that version of you and like
you know the little you coming coming
out of your head
um you know I one I mean one of the most
striking aspects of this performance
obviously is your avatar
um and you you know you embodied within
this uh eclipsatrix world that you've
built
um and so you know what did it I guess
on a on like a really you know touchy
feely level like what did what does it
feel like to be embodied as your avatar
um and how you know what's your
relationship like with her
um well it makes me feel I mean I I've
had dysphoria before where it's like oh
my gosh the body that I'm in is not you
know it's it's what a blah blah blah I'm
not even gonna get into it but it's like
now it's just like
I really could not care less what if I
if I have to dress up and go out
in like a total drag moment for me which
is like I gotta go out into the
Hungarian public and and put on a put on
a suit and still be uh hate crime for
racism
but like but like I
like
can still I could care less on I mean I
I could I definitely care and I just
keep I keep protected and stuff like I
don't I stay safe and like I don't know
I just I just stay you know
on on on you know aware of my
surroundings
um which is you know the very important
thing to do when you're like me out here
alone
um traveling and stuff but like
it makes me feel like oh this body this
is not like you don't even know like if
you look at me and you're like you're
like okay this is the person I'm seeing
like no you're not like like you don't
see you don't see [__] honestly I mean
no no offense no I mean some people see
it and I think it's cute I mean I think
I'm can be cute and stuff but
it's nothing when I think about okay you
are super cute oh thanks but like what's
be what's behind the curtain you know
like that's like
there's so much more there for me that
it's like
I am not myself you know I am you know I
am the ground I walk on I am like the
air I breathe and like all that other
stuff like I am the the words that I've
spoken and the words that I haven't
spoken you know like
I'm like well that got really deep
really fast
but you know what I mean right like
like like you you cannot take a picture
of me you know like I am like like even
in the even in the filter is like it's a
it's a nice little moment you know and
it's closer to the moment that I'm
feeling but it's
um
I'm I feel like
um uh Beyond kind of vibe yeah I mean
you know it's and I think this is a
really helpful I mean like in thinking
through worlding protocol and thinking
through all of the structures that
Define us and shape us
um you know I think that one a really
amazing entry point in in trying to
embrace the complexity of the world is
embracing the complexity in ourselves
right like we're not one thing we're
what we've done and what we haven't done
yet and like all of that kind of
together and everything in between
um and by embracing like you know how
complicated we are I think that could be
one step to kind of embracing the the
complexity of the world
um and you know speaking of the world we
I know that you're a big gamer you know
I am too
um and we love to spend time in
different Virtual Worlds um and I'm
wondering you know
what is your vision for a better
metaverse like how do you what do you
want the virtual worlds to look like
um I'm done with the 2D
there's so much 2D interface I'm like oh
my gosh screens I don't want more
screens like
all right like I I've been happy with
the with the VR VR Vibe like which is
like the glasses mode like which is it's
still like a screen
what would be nice if it was like
not a light oh you know what the kind of
screen that I like though is those like
like Kindle or what do you know those
like non-light emitting screens or yeah
like the paper white whatever yeah yeah
you burst screens I've been into the
paper screens I want to see more of that
implemented or it's like not harsh on
your eyes but like like a like a like
the pigment of an object changes instead
of Shining Light
it would be nice if it actually changed
color you know like like those like
those matte kind of screens because
I feel like that people have this idea
about what digital means and they feel
like it doesn't mean natural and I feel
like digital is so natural for me that I
would like to see it embodied in that
way or it's not in a border but like
it's an actual shape and it takes form
in the space that we exist in and it's
not light it's
it's
pigment you know
like totally
um you know that's I mean I think that
like you know I was we again we were
just talking with MacKenzie about how
everything is a technology every you
know everything that we do with our
bodies the way we eat the way we sleep
all of these are Technologies of of our
bodies and then you have like
Technologies of the self and you know
how we conceive of our own identities
um and you know it it feels like kind of
silly to differentiate that from like a
computer box you know it's just a
different kind of of Technology
um we gotta I gotta comment here
um like you know and
um from Tina Rivers Ryan who says that I
would say that digital is so naturalized
we don't even think of the tech we use
all the time as being digital which is
on which is kind of like the converse
side of the coin and also on a really
interesting a really interesting thought
um because you know the way that so many
different kinds of Technology are built
are to be like extensions of our body I
mean you just show showed the you know
you just showed the VR headset which is
you know fit fits form to you know your
your face and kind of acts as your eyes
um your phone becomes like an extension
of your hand and thus an extension of
your mind and all of the things that you
you put in there
um and yeah I don't know I think that
like there's something to be said for
maybe like thinking about
changing the way art we interact with
our screens
um maybe we need to move towards a more
organic Paradigm where things are you
know we we're it's it's more about
integration with ourselves and less
about you know the the kind of
phenomenological like Bam Bam of bright
lights and shiny renders and you know
screens that you know burn your eyeballs
out when you stare at them for 17 hours
working on 3D models like I know you do
all the time yeah
um yeah
um
you know we don't uh I would love you
know so and I think that something
another thing that is is a little bit
off topic but I wanted to talk to you
about is you mentioned some of your
filter work and I know you were working
on some filters that specifically
related to deep sea creatures and
creatures from the from the deep
um and we were just talking the other
day with Joey holder who's an artist
who's also were thinking about the same
thing and working on this Abyssal Seeker
project about creatures from the ocean
floor
um and you know we were talking also in
this Festival a lot about regenerative
ecologies and ways of thinking through
inter-species interdependence in ways
that decenter the human and that you
know think about you focus on other
forms of life
um and I'm wondering if you could talk a
little bit about your connection to the
deep sea and what that means to you and
the things that you're thinking about as
you are building some of these fantastic
um undersea beings
oh
well
we of our ancestors lived in the ocean
um
fishes and things still do
um obvi but like
I I for me it's like
those are like they're they're us like
we're down there like we I like
it's so strange that like breathing
breathing and lungs like
I don't know it's just like it like the
when I think about like the first
perception of solids and liquids and
fluids and things
it must be like this is like it's just
like oh so flawed because like
like
if we can see air the way that we see
water when we can see some gases like
that but it's like
when you look at what it's just like a
strange phenomena like the way that
we've evolved to perceive things
and so the ocean is like in my opinion
like I mean there's lots of I love I
love you know I think about expansive
definitions of life but like like the
ocean is very much alive full of
bacteria very much full of the most
organisms on Earth
um
and but I mean then you think about like
then the air like the wind I don't know
I was talking about the wind earlier but
I don't I don't I don't I just feel like
there's so much life that that obviously
we see I've not yet discovered or even
really uh pursued in a lot of different
ways so it's like
I think about like I'd love to one day
uh
go and discover some new things and you
know use you know an artistic practice
like 3D scanning or I don't know not
just 3D scanning but like
I feel like technology and art like
especially Tech art like they push each
other like I want I want to see 3D
scanning I want to be able to scan
through objects now now I'm like okay
I'm not I'm not satisfied just scanning
the exterior of an object I want to see
what's underground I want to see like
you know what I mean like so I think
about the ocean when I think about you
know all the unexplored depths all these
ancient runes that we're still
discovering how I think about how
Antarctica Antarctica is such a huge
vast unexplored territory
of that could also hold ruins I love
watching you you know like like ancient
alien videos but like I don't I'm not
super sure about that but I'm just like
there's a love questions lots of
questions to be asked about like the
origins of like Civilization Humanity
that are all like hidden in these you
know different things about like
Evolution and how long we've been the
species that we've been and like
all these like questions about our
Origins and not just our our ancient
Origins but are like very recent Origins
like just from like a few thousand years
ago like or tens of thousands of years
ago
so it's like
whoa like there's so the ocean is just
so much questions and I just feel like
it's in a Quantum state right now and
you know with like the way that I feel
my personality is is also in a Quantum
state so it's like so I feel uh very
attached to the ocean in that way where
it's I when I feel like I'm exploring
the exterior world and thinking about
you know maybe future expeditions to the
middle of the ocean in the deep sea or
who knows but like
when I think about that I think about
you know that's me wanting to explore
myself and you know uh ourselves so
that's like
my person my I feel like it's a part of
me the ocean is like
part of me that I don't know yet you
know and part of us
yeah yeah yeah totally and I mean even
you know in thinking about this this
comment about you know water versus Air
in our perception like why is it that we
feel that water is thick and air is thin
and we breathe one but not the other and
you know we were in you know we were
talking the other day about how when you
go deep into the ocean you know
different levels of saline water look
differently so even water as you you
entered in the deep sea can be look like
a totally different substance like water
within water and then you get into this
kind of like Inception hole
um and in the end of the day it's like
kind of like this metaphor of how we're
all moving through different states of
being in different states of fluidity
and um you know depending on the
pressure that we're under or the
conditions of our of our environment
um you know I know that we've talked in
the past about how so many of these like
deep sea creatures
live in unbelievably you know into US
inhospitable environments but to them
these are like they're thriving places
where they've been able to adapt
perfectly to that change and you know I
think that that's you know that's really
it's really beautiful and rather than
looking at these creatures as other or
weird trying to accept that they live in
a different reality from us one that is
made for them or that they are made for
um you know we don't have uh we don't
have a lot of time
um but Huntress I wanted to ask you you
know as we close out worlding protocol
Festival
um you know what advice do you as a
World Builder have to give to the
audience about what how we should look
towards the future let's close out with
something positive and constructive
um I mean we're all building worlds
every day you know every like the world
that you live in is the world that you
know is built by you know your
perception so it's not just your
perception but also like your actions
and all just like a million different
things but like
yeah the world everybody we're all
sharing a world but it's also like
everybody's living in a different world
so worlds
you know when you when you see somebody
walking down the street and you might
have never met him before some of them
they're living in their own whole world
and it's like whoa that's a trip like
they have they've got friends and all
these things that you don't even know
about or like you know like like who
knows like what world you know they
could there could be so many different
worlds that are just like unexplored and
just behind the next door and you know
like right beneath your feet and you
didn't know where like you know right
you know like on a different scale like
above the sky you know in the stars or
like in the plant you know the ant
that's walking that walking towards the
the crumb that you just left lived a
whole life and you know ants live for
like 10 years maybe like ants can live
for many years and it's like whoa like
that ant like that you just stepped on
on accident like that was like that it
was like the final moment for The Ant
and for you we were just walking down
the street and that was living a world
and like I don't know like like I don't
know I just yeah the world like
and the worlds that are in our screens
are just like a whole other trip and
it's just like
yeah I'm I'm stuck in those trying to
get out you know in a big way
try to make the screen world into the
real world
um
but yeah I mean that's my vibe about the
welding
the protocol for worlding is that
there's there's just so many and also
there's just only one there's I'll share
it it's all in one world which is the
trippiest part it's like oh it's all
simultaneous and you know singular
totally I mean we on on the first day
Doreen one of my co-hosts um came on she
she dropped a quote and I'm gonna forget
who said it but the quote is basically I
want to live in a world I want to live
in a world that has many worlds in it
um or you know the world should be a
world that has you know infinite worlds
inside of it and I think that's kind of
you know what you're getting at we have
to really think about you know our
difference in our collectivity
um and all of the kind of difference and
beautiful Rich difference that that you
know we have around us
um what a great way to what a great way
to close our conversation
um thank you so much Huntress for being
here your performance was beautiful you
guys can go to at Huntress on Instagram
um and try out some of their face
filters you can also
um you know check out some of the clips
of the work of the Athens biennale
um it's really beautiful congratulations
again oh thanks Wade
thanks for having me yeah of course of
course
um you know to our audience who's still
here thank you so much for being here
and sticking through gray area worlding
protocol
um this is it uh great area of 2020
Great area Festival 2021 is a wrap uh if
you want to engage with us hit us up on
Twitter and Instagram we're at gray area
org
um and let's keep the conversation going
we always love to hear from from folks
let us know what ideas this this
Festival was able to spark in you and
maybe we can build some dialogue
together
um until then thank you again to all of
the speakers and participants it was
amazing to have you thank you to the
whole great area team
um and we'll catch you next year for
2022.